- Java comes with thousands of built-in classes, and there are countless more from developers like you. With all those classes, Java needs a way to organize them. It handles this in a way similar to a file cabinet. You put all your pieces of paper in folders. Java puts classes in packages. These are logical groupings for classes.

- Java classes are grouped into packages. The import statement tells the compiler which package to look in to find a class. This is similar to how mailing a letter works.

- Imagine you are mailing a letter to 123 Main St., Apartment 9. The mail carrier first brings the letter to 123 Main St. Then she looks for the mailbox for apartment number 9. The address is like the package name in Java. The apartment number is like the class name in Java. Just as the mail carrier only looks at apartment numbers in the building, Java only looks for class names in the package.

- Package names are hierarchical like the mail as well. If it begins with java or javax, this means it came with the JDK. If it starts with something else, it likely shows where it came from using the website name in reverse. From example, com.amazon.java8book tells us the code came from amazon.com. After the website name, you can add whatever you want. For example, com.amazon.java8.my.name also came from amazon.com. Java calls more detailed packages child packages. com.amazon.java8book is a child package of com.amazon. You can tell because it’s longer and thus more specific.

- Classes in the same package are often imported together. You can use a shortcut (*) to import all the classes in a package.

- For example, we imported java.util.Random and a pile of other classes. The * is a wildcard that matches all classes in the package. Every class in the java.util package is available to this program when Java compiles it. It doesn’t import child packages, fields, or methods; it imports only classes. (Okay, it’s only classes for now, but there’s a special type of import called the “static import” that imports other types. You’ll learn more about that in Chapter 4).

- You might think that including so many classes slows down your program, but it doesn’t. The compiler figures out what’s actually needed. Which approach you choose is personal preference. Listing the classes used makes the code easier to read, especially for new programmers. Using the wildcard can shorten the import list. You’ll see both approaches on the exam.

- There’s one special package in the Java world called java.lang. This package is special in that it is automatically imported. You can still type this package in an import statement, but you don’t have to.

- Another case of redundancy involves importing a class that is in the same package as the class importing it. Java automatically looks in the current package for other classes.

   - import java.nio.*; // NO GOOD – a wildcard only matches, class names, not "file.*Files"
   - import java.nio.*.*; // NO GOOD – you can only have one wildcard, and it must be at the end
   - import java.nio.files.Paths.*; // NO GOOD – you cannot import methods, only class names