- A Java program begins execution with its main() method. A main() method is the gateway between the startup of a Java process, which is managed by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), and the beginning of the programmer’s code. The JVM calls on the underlying system to allocate memory and CPU time, access files, and so on.

- The main() method lets us hook our code into this process, keeping it alive long enough to do the work we’ve coded.

- To compile Java code, the file must have the extension .java. The name of the file must match the name of the class. The result is a file of bytecode by the same name, but with a .class filename extension. Bytecode consists of instructions that the JVM knows how to execute. Notice that we must omit the .class extension to run Zoo.java because the period has a reserved meaning in the JVM.

- The keyword static binds a method to its class so it can be called by just the class name, as in, for example, Zoo.main(). Java doesn’t need to create an object to call the main() method—which is good since you haven’t learned about creating objects yet! In fact, the JVM does this, more or less, when loading the class name given to it. If a main() method isn’t present in the class we name with the .java executable, the process will throw an error and terminate. Even if a main() method is present, Java will throw an exception if it isn’t static. A nonstatic main() method might as well be invisible from the point of view of the JVM.

- The keyword void represents the return type. A method that returns no data returns control to the caller silently. In general, it’s good practice to use void for methods that change an object’s state. In that sense, the main() method changes the program state from started to finished.

- To review, you need to have a JDK to compile because it includes a compiler. You do not need to have a JDK to run the code—a JRE is enough. Java class files run on the JVM and therefore run on any machine with Java rather than just the machine or operating system they happened to have been compiled on.

- All command-line arguments are treated as String objects, even if they represent another data type
$ javac Zoo.java
$ java Zoo Zoo 2