- To use most classes, you have to create objects. An object is a runtime instance of a class in memory. All the various objects of all the different classes represent the state of your program.

- Fields ~ Variables: Hold the state of the program, if the change is important to remember, a variable stores that change.

- Methods ~ Functions, procedures: Operate on that state.

- Methods, Fields: Members of the class.

- A String is a value that we can put text into, such as "__this is a string__". String is also a class supplied with Java.

- *public* is used to signify that this method may be called from other classes.

- The full declaration of a method is called a method *signature*.

- Another common part of the code is called a *comment*. Because comments aren’t executable code, you can place them anywhere. Comments make your code easier to read.

- A single-line comment begins with two slashes. Anything you type after that on the same line is ignored by the compiler.
EX: // comment until end of line.

- A multiple-line comment (also known as a multiline comment) includes anything starting from the symbol /* until the symbol */.

- This comment is similar to a multiline comment except it starts with /**. This special syntax tells the Javadoc tool to pay attention to the comment. Javadoc comments have a specific structure that the Javadoc tool knows how to read.

- Most of the time, each Java class is defined in its own *.java file. It is usually public, which means any code can call it. Interestingly, Java does not require that the class be public. For example, this class is just fine:
1: class Animal {
2:    String name;
3: }

- You can even put two classes in the same file. When you do so, at most one of the classes in the file is allowed to be public. That means a file containing the following is also fine:
1: public class Animal {
2:    private String name;
3: }
4: class Animal2 {
5: }

- If you do have a public class, it needs to match the filename. public class Animal2 would not compile in a file named Animal.java.