11. D
12. E. The main method tries to cast a Firefox instance to IE. Since IE is not a subclass of Firefox, this throws a ClassCastException.
13. B
14. E. Code involving instanceof does not compile when there is no way for it to evaluate true. D not only compiles but it is always true. E does not compile because ArrayList is a concrete class that does not extend Chipmunk. F does compile because Runnable is an interface. In theory, someone could subclass Chipmunk and have the subclass implement Runnable.
15. B E
16. E. This is a member inner class. It needs to be created using an instance of the outer class. The syntax looks weird, but it creates an object of the outer class and then an object of the inner class from it.
17. B, C. Enums are required to have a semicolon after the list of values if there is anything else in the enum. Don’t worry; you won’t be expected to track down missing semicolons on the whole exam—only on enum questions. Enums are not allowed to have a public constructor.
18. G
19. A C
20. C. Both objects are BabyRhino objects. Virtual method invocation says that the subclass method gets called at runtime rather than the type in the variable reference. However, we are not calling methods here. We are referring to instance variables. With instance variables, the reference type does matter.
21. A, C, E. Remember that @Override means that we are implementing a method from a superclass or interface. The Object class declares methods with the signatures in Options A and C. Granted, it is a poor implementation of equals(), but it does compile. Option E is also correct because the method is declared in Otter. Option F is incorrect because methods from an interface are always public. Option B is incorrect because the parameter type does not match the one in Object. Option D is incorrect because the return type does not match the one in Object.