13. E. static final variables must be set exactly once, and it must be in the declaration line or in a static initialization block. Line 4 doesn’t compile because bench is not set in either of these locations. Line 15 doesn’t compile because final variables are not allowed to be set after that point. Line 11 doesn’t compile because name is set twice: once in the declaration and again in the static block. Line 12 doesn’t compile because rightRope is set twice as well. Both are in static initialization blocks.
14. B. The two valid ways to do this are import static java.util.Collections.*; and import static java.util.Collections.sort;. Option A is incorrect because you can only do a static import on static members. Classes such as Collections require a regular import. Option C is nonsense as method parameters have no business in an import. Options D, E, and F try to trick you into reversing the syntax of import static.
15. E. The argument on line 17 is a short. It can be promoted to an int, so print() on line 5 is invoked. The argument on line 18 is a boolean. It can be autoboxed to a boolean, so print() on line 11 is invoked. The argument on line 19 is a double. It can be autoboxed to a double, so print() on line 11 is invoked. Therefore, the output is intObjectObject and the correct answer is option E.
16. B
17. B D E
18. C, G. Since the main() method is in the same class, it can call private methods in the class. this() may only be called as the first line of a constructor. this.variableName can be called from any instance method to refer to an instance variable. It cannot be called from a static method because there is no instance of the class to refer to. Option F is tricky. The default constructor is only written by the compiler if no user-defined constructors were provided. this() can only be called from a constructor in the same class. Since there can be no user-defined constructors in the class if a default constructor was created, it is impossible for option F to be true.