# Wrapper Classes

- Up to now, we’ve only put String objects in the ArrayList. What happens if we want to put primitives in? Each primitive type has a wrapper class, which is an object type that corresponds to the primitive. Table below lists all the wrapper classes along with the constructor for each.

| Primitive Type | Wrapper Class | Example of Constructing        |
|----------------|---------------|--------------------------------|
| boolean        | Boolean       | new Boolean(true)              |
| byte           | Byte          | new Byte((byte) 1)             |
| short          | Short         | new Short((short) 1)           |
| int            | Integer       | new Integer(1)                 |
| long           | Long          | new Long(1)                    |
| float          | Float         | new Float(1.0)                 |
| double         | Double        | new Double(1.0)                |
| char           | Character     | new Character('c')             |

- The wrapper classes also have a method that converts back to a primitive. You don’t need to know much about the constructors or intValue() type methods for the exam because autoboxing has removed the need for them (see the next section).

- There are also methods for converting a String to a primitive or wrapper class. You do need to know these methods. The parse methods, such as parseInt(), return a primitive, and the valueOf() method returns a wrapper class. This is easy to remember because the name of the returned primitive is in the method name. For example:
```
int primitive = Integer.parseInt("123");
Integer wrapper = Integer.valueOf("123");
```

- he first line converts a String to an int primitive. The second converts a String to an Integer wrapper class. If the String passed in is not valid for the given type, Java throws an exception. In these examples, letters and dots are not valid for an integer value:
```
int bad1 = Integer.parseInt("a"); // throws NumberFormatException
Integer bad2 = Integer.valueOf("123.45"); // throws NumberFormatException
```

- Before you worry, the exam won’t make you recognize that the method parseInt() is used rather than parseInteger(). You simply need to be able to recognize the methods when put in front of you. Also, the Character class doesn’t participate in the parse/valueOf methods. Since a String is made up of characters, you can just call charAt() normally.

- Table below lists the methods you need to recognize for creating a primitive or wrapper class object from a String. In real coding, you won’t be so concerned which is returned from each method due to autoboxing.

| Wrapper Class | Converting String to Primitive      | Converting String to Wrapper Class      |
|---------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Boolean       | Boolean.parseBoolean("true");      | Boolean.valueOf("TRUE");               |
| Byte          | Byte.parseByte("1");               | Byte.valueOf("2");                     |
| Short         | Short.parseShort("1");             | Short.valueOf("2");                    |
| Integer       | Integer.parseInt("1");             | Integer.valueOf("2");                  |
| Long          | Long.parseLong("1");               | Long.valueOf("2");                     |
| Float         | Float.parseFloat("1");             | Float.valueOf("2.2");                  |
| Double        | Double.parseDouble("1");           | Double.valueOf("2.2");                 |
| Character     | None                                | None                                    |

# Autoboxing

- Why won’t you need to be concerned with whether a primitive or wrapper class is returned, you ask? Since Java 5, you can just type the primitive value and Java will convert it to the relevant wrapper class for you. This is called autoboxing. Let’s look at an example:
```
4: List<Double> weights = new ArrayList<>();
5: weights.add(50.5); // [50.5]
6: weights.add(new Double(60)); // [50.5, 60.0]
7: weights.remove(50.5); // [60.0]
8: double first = weights.get(0); // 60.0
```

- Line 5 autoboxes the double primitive into a Double object and adds that to the List. Line 6 shows that you can still write code the long way and pass in a wrapper object. Line 7 again autoboxes into the wrapper object and passes it to remove(). Line 8 retrieves the Double and unboxes it into a double primitive.
```
3: List<Integer> heights = new ArrayList<>();
4: heights.add(null);
5: int h = heights.get(0); // NullPointerException
```

- On line 4, we add a null to the list. This is legal because a null reference can be assigned to any reference variable. On line 5, we try to unbox that null to an int primitive. This is a problem. Java tries to get the int value of null. Since calling any method on null gives a NullPointerException, that is just what we get. Be careful when you see null in relation to autoboxing.

- Be careful when autoboxing into Integer. What do you think this code outputs?
```
List<Integer> numbers = new ArrayList<>();
numbers.add(1);
numbers.add(2);
numbers.remove(1);
System.out.println(numbers);
```

- It actually outputs 1. After adding the two values, the List contains [1, 2]. We then request the element with index 1 be removed. That’s right: index 1. Because there’s already a remove() method that takes an int parameter, Java calls that method rather than autoboxing. If you want to remove the 2, you can write numbers.remove(new Integer(2)) to force wrapper class use.

# Converting Between array and List

- You should know how to convert between an array and an ArrayList. Let’s start with turning an ArrayList into an array:
```
3: List<String> list = new ArrayList<>();
4: list.add("hawk");
5: list.add("robin");
6: Object[] objectArray = list.toArray();
7: System.out.println(objectArray.length); // 2
8: String[] stringArray = list.toArray(new String[0]);
9: System.out.println(stringArray.length); // 2
```

- Line 6 shows that an ArrayList knows how to convert itself to an array. The only problem is that it defaults to an array of class Object. This isn’t usually what you want. Line 8 specifies the type of the array and does what we actually want. The advantage of specifying a size of 0 for the parameter is that Java will create a new array of the proper size for the return value. If you like, you can suggest a larger array to be used instead. If the ArrayList fits in that array, it will be returned. Otherwise, a new one will be created.

- Converting from an array to a List is more interesting. The original array and created array backed List are linked. When a change is made to one, it is available in the other. It is a fixed-size list and is also known a backed List because the array changes with it. Pay careful attention to the values here:
```
20: String[] array = { "hawk", "robin" }; // [hawk, robin]
21: List<String> list = Arrays.asList(array); // returns fixed size list
22: System.out.println(list.size()); // 2
23: list.set(1, "test"); // [hawk, test]
24: array[0] = "new"; // [new, test]
25: for (String b : array) System.out.print(b + " "); // new test
26: list.remove(1); // throws UnsupportedOperation Exception
```

- Line 21 converts the array to a List. Note that it isn’t the java.util.ArrayList we’ve grown used to. It is a fixed-size, backed version of a List. Line 23 is okay because set() merely replaces an existing value. It updates both array and list because they point to the same data store. Line 24 also changes both array and list. Line 25 shows the array has changed to new test. Line 26 throws an exception because we are not allowed to change the size of the list.

- __A Cool Trick with Varargs__: This topic isn’t on the exam, but merging varargs with ArrayList conversion allows you to create an ArrayList in a cool way:
```
List<String> list = Arrays.asList("one", "two");
```

- asList() takes varargs, which let you pass in an array or just type out the String values. This is handy when testing because you can easily create and populate a List on one line.

# Sorting

- Sorting an ArrayList is very similar to sorting an array. You just use a different helper class:
```
List<Integer> numbers = new ArrayList<>();
numbers.add(99);
numbers.add(5);
numbers.add(81);
Collections.sort(numbers);
System.out.println(numbers); // [5, 81, 99]
```