### Reviewing Constructor Rules

- Constructor Definition Rules:
   - The first statement of every constructor is a call to another constructor within the class using this(), or a call to a constructor in the direct parent class using super().
   - The super() call may not be used after the first statement of the constructor.
   - If no super() call is declared in a constructor, Java will insert a no-argument super() as the first statement of the constructor.
   - If the parent doesn’t have a no-argument constructor and the child doesn’t define any constructors, the compiler will throw an error and try to insert a default no-argument constructor into the child class
   - If the parent doesn’t have a no-argument constructor, the compiler requires an explicit call to a parent constructor in each child constructor.

### Calling Constructors

- Now that we have covered how to define a valid constructor, we’ll show you how Java calls the constructors. In Java, the parent constructor is always executed before the child constructor. For example, try to determine what the following code outputs:

```java
class Primate {
 public Primate() {
  System.out.println("Primate");
 }
}
class Ape extends Primate {
 public Ape() {
  System.out.println("Ape");
 }
}
public class Chimpanzee extends Ape {
 public static void main(String[] args) {
  new Chimpanzee();
 }
}
```

- The compiler first inserts the super() command as the first statement of both the Primate and Ape constructors. Next, the compiler inserts a default no-argument constructor in the Chimpanzee class with super() as the first statement of the constructor. The code will execute with the parent constructors called first and yields the following output:

```
Primate
Ape
```

## Calling Inherited Class Members

- Java classes may use any public or protected member of the parent class, including methods, primitives, or object references. If the parent class and child class are part of the same package, the child class may also use any default members defined in the parent class. Finally, a child class may never access a private member of the parent class, at least not through any direct reference. As you saw in the first example in this chapter, a private member age may be accessed indirectly via a public or protected method.

- To reference a member in a parent class, you can just call it directly, as in the following example with the output function displaySharkDetails():

```java
class Fish {
 protected int size;
 private int age;

 public Fish(int age) {
  this.age = age;
 }

 public int getAge() {
  return age;
 }
}
public class Shark extends Fish {
 private int numberOfFins = 8;

 public Shark(int age) {
  super(age);
  this.size = 4;
 }

 public void displaySharkDetails() {
  System.out.print("Shark with age: "+getAge());
  System.out.print(" and "+size+" meters long");
  System.out.print(" with "+numberOfFins+" fins");
 }
}
```

- In the child class, we use the public method getAge() and protected member size to access values in the parent class.

- As you may remember from Chapter 4, you can use the keyword this to access a member of the class. You may also use this to access members of the parent class that are accessible from the child class, since a child class inherits all of its parent members. Consider the following alternative definition to the displaySharkDetails() method in the previous example:

```java
public void displaySharkDetails() {
 System.out.print("Shark with age: "+this.getAge());
 System.out.print(" and "+this.size+" meters long");
 System.out.print(" with "+this.numberOfFins+" fins");
}
```

- In Java, you can explicitly reference a member of the parent class by using the super keyword, as in the following alternative definition of displaySharkDetails():

```java
public void displaySharkDetails() {
 System.out.print("Shark with age: "+super.getAge());
 System.out.print(" and "+super.size+" meters long");
 System.out.print(" with "+this.numberOfFins+" fins");
}
```

- In the previous example, we could use this or super to access a member of the parent class, but is the same true for a member of the child class? Consider this example:

```java
public void displaySharkDetails() {
 System.out.print("Shark with age: "+super.getAge());
 System.out.print(" and "+super.size+" meters long");
 System.out.print(" with "+super.numberOfFins+" fins"); // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

- This code will not compile because numberOfFins is only a member of the current class, not the parent class. In other words, we see that this and super may both be used for methods or variables defined in the parent class, but only this may be used for members defined in the current class.

- As you’ll see in the next section, if the child class overrides a member of the parent class, this and super could have very different effects when applied to a class member.

- __super() vs. super__: As discussed in Chapter 4, this() and this are unrelated in Java. Likewise, super() and super are quite different but may be used in the same methods on the exam. The first, super(), is a statement that explicitly calls a parent constructor and may only be used in the first line of a constructor of a child class. The second, super, is a keyword used to reference a member defined in a parent class and may be used throughout the child class.

- The exam may try to trick you by using both super() and super in a constructor. For example, consider the following code:

```java
public Rabbit(int age) {
 super();
 super.setAge(10);
}
```

- The first statement of the constructor calls the parent’s constructor, whereas the second statement calls a function defined in the parent class. Contrast this with the following code, which doesn’t compile:

```java
public Rabbit(int age) {
 super; // DOES NOT COMPILE
 super().setAge(10); // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

- This code looks similar to the previous example, but neither line of the constructor will compile since they are using the keywords incorrectly. When you see super() or super on the exam, be sure to check that they are being used correctly.