- A variable is a name for a piece of memory that stores data. After we’ve declared a variable, we can give it a value. This is called initializing a variable.

- As you should expect, three variables were declared: i1, i2, and i3. However, only one of those values was initialized: i3. The other two remain declared but not yet initialized. That’s the trick. Each snippet separated by a comma is a little declaration of its own. The initialization of i3 only applies to i3. It doesn’t have anything to do with i1 or i2 despite being in the same statement.
```
int i1, i2, i3 = 0;
```

- This code doesn’t compile because it tries to declare multiple variables of different types in the same statement. The shortcut to declare multiple variables in the same statement only works when they share a type.
```
int num, String value; // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

- It probably comes as no surprise that Java has precise rules about *identifier names*. Luckily, the same rules for identifiers apply to anything you are free to name, including variables, methods, classes, and fields. There are only three rules to remember for legal identifiers:
   - The name must begin with a letter or the symbol $ or _.
   - Subsequent characters may also be numbers.
   - You cannot use the same name as a Java *reserved word*. As you might imagine, a reserved word is a keyword that Java has reserved so that you are not allowed to use it. Remember that Java is case sensitive, so you can use versions of the keywords that only differ in case. Please don’t, though.

- The following is a list of all the reserved words in Java. const and goto aren’t actually used in Java. They are reserved so that people coming from other languages don’t use them by accident—and in theory, in case Java wants to use them one day.
| Keywords         | Keywords         | Keywords         | Keywords         |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| abstract         | assert           | boolean          | break            |
| byte             | case             | catch            | char             |
| class            | const*           | continue         | default          |
| do               | double           | else             | enum             |
| extends          | false            | final            | finally          |
| float            | for              | goto*            | if               |
| implements       | import           | instanceof       | int              |
| interface        | long             | native           | new              |
| null             | package          | private          | protected        |
| public           | return           | short            | static           |
| strictfp         | super            | switch           | synchronized     |
| this             | throw            | throws           | transient        |
| true             | try              | void             | volatile         |
| while            |                  |                  |                  |

- When you see a nonstandard identifier, be sure to check if it is legal. If not, you get to mark the answer “does not compile” and skip analyzing everything else in the question.

- Most Java developers follow these conventions for identifier names:
   - Method and variables names begin with a lowercase letter followed by CamelCase.
   - Class names begin with an uppercase letter followed by CamelCase. Don’t start any identifiers with $. The compiler uses this symbol for some files.

- Also, know that valid letters in Java are not just characters in the English alphabet. Java supports the Unicode character set, so there are more than 45,000 characters that can start a legal Java identifier. A few hundred more are non-Arabic numerals that may appear after the first character in a legal identifier. Luckily, you don’t have to worry about memorizing those for the exam. If you are in a country that doesn’t use the English alphabet, this is useful to know for a job.

- A local variable is a variable defined within a method. Local variables must be initialized before use. They do not have a default value and contain garbage data until initialized. The compiler will not let you read an uninitialized value. 

- Until a local variable is assigned a value, it cannot appear within an expression, and the compiler will gladly remind you of this rule. The compiler knows your code has control of what happens inside the method and can be expected to initialize values.

- Variables that are not local variables are known as instance variables or class variables. Instance variables are also called fields. Class variables are shared across multiple objects. You can tell a variable is a class variable because it has the keyword static before it. 

- Instance and class variables do not require you to initialize them. As soon as you declare these variables, they are given a default value. You’ll need to memorize everything in table below except the default value of char. To make this easier, remember that the compiler doesn’t know what value to use and so wants the simplest type it can give the value: null for an object and 0/false for a primitive.
| Variable type                     | Default initialization value                  |
|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| boolean                            | false                                        |
| byte, short, int, long            | 0 (in the type’s bit-length)                |
| float, double                     | 0.0 (in the type’s bit-length)              |
| char                               | '\u0000' (NUL)                             |
| All object references (everything else) | null                                   |

- Local variables can never have a scope larger than the method they are defined in. However, they can have a smaller scope. 