# Understanding an ArrayList

- An array has one glaring shortcoming: you have to know how many elements will be in the array when you create it and then you are stuck with that choice. Just like a StringBuilder, ArrayList can change size at runtime as needed. Like an array, an ArrayList is an ordered sequence that allows duplicates.

- As when we used Arrays.sort, ArrayList requires an import. To use it, you must have either of the following two statements in your class:
```
import java.util.* // import whole package including ArrayList
import java.util.ArrayList; // import just ArrayList
```

- __Creating an ArrayList__: There are three ways to create an ArrayList:
```
ArrayList list1 = new ArrayList();
ArrayList list2 = new ArrayList(10);
ArrayList list3 = new ArrayList(list2);
```

- The first says to create an ArrayList containing space for the default number of elements but not to fill any slots yet. The second says to create an ArrayList containing a specific number of slots, but again not to assign any. The final example tells Java that we want to make a copy of another ArrayList. We copy both the size and contents of that ArrayList. Granted, list2 is empty in this example so it isn’t particularly interesting.

- Although these are the only three constructors you need to know, you do need to learn some variants of it. The previous examples were the old pre–Java 5 way of creating an ArrayList. They still work and you still need to know they work. You also need to know the new and improved way. Java 5 introduced generics, which allow you to specify the type of class that the ArrayList will contain.
```
ArrayList<String> list4 = new ArrayList<String>();
ArrayList<String> list5 = new ArrayList<>();
```

- Java 5 allows you to tell the compiler what the type would be by specifying it between < and >. Starting in Java 7, you can even omit that type from the right side. The < and > are still required, though. This is called the diamond operator because <> looks like a diamond.

-  ArrayList implements an interface called List. In other words, an ArrayList is a List. You will learn about interfaces in Chapter 5. In the meantime, just know that you can store an ArrayList in a List reference variable but not vice versa. The reason is that List is an interface and interfaces can’t be instantiated.
```
List<String> list6 = new ArrayList<>();
ArrayList<String> list7 = new List<>(); // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

- __Using an ArrayList__: Before reading any further, you are going to see something new in the method signatures: a “class” named E. Don’t worry—it isn’t really a class. E is used by convention in generics to mean “any class that this array can hold.” If you didn’t specify a type when creating the ArrayList, E means Object. Otherwise, it means the class you put between < and >.

- You should also know that ArrayList implements toString() so you can easily see the contents just by printing it. Arrays do not do produce such pretty output.

- __add()__: The add() methods insert a new value in the ArrayList. The method signatures are as follows:
```
boolean add(E element)
void add(int index, E element)
```

- Don’t worry about the boolean return value. It always returns true. It is there because other classes in the collections family need a return value in the signature when adding an element. Since add() is the most critical ArrayList method you need to know for the exam, we are going to show a few sets of examples for it. Let’s start with the most straightforward case:
```
ArrayList list = new ArrayList();
list.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
list.add(Boolean.TRUE); // [hawk, true]
System.out.println(list); // [hawk, true]
```

- add() does exactly what we expect: it stores the String in the no longer empty
ArrayList. It then does the same thing for the boolean. This is okay because we didn’t specify a type for ArrayList; therefore, the type is Object, which includes everything except primitives. It may not have been what we intended, but the compiler doesn’t know that. Now, let’s use generics to tell the compiler we only want to allow String objects in our ArrayList:
```
ArrayList<String> safer = new ArrayList<>();
safer.add("sparrow");
safer.add(Boolean.TRUE); // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

- This time the compiler knows that only String objects are allowed in and prevents the attempt to add a boolean. Now let’s try adding multiple values to different positions.
```
4: List<String> birds = new ArrayList<>();
5: birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
6: birds.add(1, "robin"); // [hawk, robin]
7: birds.add(0, "blue jay"); // [blue jay, hawk, robin]
8: birds.add(1, "cardinal"); // [blue jay, cardinal, hawk, robin]
9: System.out.println(birds); // [blue jay, cardinal, hawk, robin]
```

- __remove()__: The remove() methods remove the first matching value in the ArrayList or remove the element at a specified index. The method signatures are as follows:
```
boolean remove(Object object)
E remove(int index)
```

- This time the boolean return value tells us whether a match was removed. The E return type is the element that actually got removed. The following shows how to use these methods:
```
3: List<String> birds = new ArrayList<>();
4: birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
5: birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk, hawk]
6: System.out.println(birds.remove("cardinal")); // prints false
7: System.out.println(birds.remove("hawk")); // prints true
8: System.out.println(birds.remove(0)); // prints hawk
9: System.out.println(birds); // []
```

- Since calling remove() with an int uses the index, an index that doesn’t exist will throw an exception. For example, birds.remove(100) throws an IndexOutOfBoundsException. There is also a removeIf() method. We’ll cover it in the next chapter because it uses lambda expressions (a topic in that chapter).

- __set()__: The set() method changes one of the elements of the ArrayList without changing the size. The method signature is as follows:
```
E set(int index, E newElement)
```

- The E return type is the element that got replaced. The following shows how to use this method:
```
15: List<String> birds = new ArrayList<>();
16: birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
17: System.out.println(birds.size()); // 1
18: birds.set(0, "robin"); // [robin]
19: System.out.println(birds.size()); // 1
20: birds.set(1, "robin"); // IndexOutOfBoundsException
```

- __isEmpty() and size()__: The isEmpty() and size() methods look at how many of the slots are in use. The method signatures are as follows:
```
boolean isEmpty()
int size()
```

- The following shows how to use these methods:
```
System.out.println(birds.isEmpty()); // true
System.out.println(birds.size()); // 0
birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk, hawk]
System.out.println(birds.isEmpty()); // false
System.out.println(birds.size()); // 2
```

- __clear()__: The clear() method provides an easy way to discard all elements of the ArrayList. The method signature is as follows:
```
void clear()
```

- The following shows how to use this method:
```
List<String> birds = new ArrayList<>();
birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk, hawk]
System.out.println(birds.isEmpty()); // false
System.out.println(birds.size()); // 2
birds.clear(); // []
System.out.println(birds.isEmpty()); // true
System.out.println(birds.size()); // 0
```

- __contains()__: The contains() method checks whether a certain value is in the ArrayList. The method signature is as follows:
```
boolean contains(Object object)
```

- The following shows how to use this method:
```
List<String> birds = new ArrayList<>();
birds.add("hawk"); // [hawk]
System.out.println(birds.contains("hawk")); // true
System.out.println(birds.contains("robin")); // false
```

- __equals()__: Finally, ArrayList has a custom implementation of equals() so you can compare two lists to see if they contain the same elements in the same order.
```
boolean equals(Object object)
```

- The following shows an example:
```
31: List<String> one = new ArrayList<>();
32: List<String> two = new ArrayList<>();
33: System.out.println(one.equals(two)); // true
34: one.add("a"); // [a]
35: System.out.println(one.equals(two)); // false
36: two.add("a"); // [a]
37: System.out.println(one.equals(two)); // true
38: one.add("b"); // [a,b]
39: two.add(0, "b"); // [b,a]
40: System.out.println(one.equals(two)); // false
```