- __Be able to write code using a main() method.__ A main() method is usually written as public static void main(String[] args). Arguments are referenced starting with args[0]. Accessing an argument that wasn’t passed in will cause the code to throw an exception.

- __Understand the effect of using packages and imports.__ Packages contain Java classes. Classes can be imported by class name or wildcard. Wildcards do not look at subdirectories. In the event of a conflict, class name imports take precedence.

- __Be able to recognize a constructor.__ A constructor has the same name as the class. It looks like a method without a return type.

- __Be able to identify legal and illegal declarations and initialization.__ Multiple variables can be declared and initialized in the same statement when they share a type. Local variables require an explicit initialization; others use the default value for that type. Identifiers may contain letters, numbers, $, or _. Identifiers may not begin with numbers. Numeric literals may contain underscores between two digits and begin with 1–9, 0, 0x, 0X, 0b, and 0B.

- __Be able to determine where variables go into and out of scope.__ All variables go into scope when they are declared. Local variables go out of scope when the block they are declared in ends. Instance variables go out of scope when the object is garbage collected. Class variables remain in scope as long as the program is running.

- __Be able to recognize misplaced statements in a class.__ Package and import statements are optional. If present, both go before the class declaration in that order. Fields and methods are also optional and are allowed in any order within the class declaration.

- __Know how to identify when an object is eligible for garbage collection.__ Draw a diagram to keep track of references and objects as you trace the code. When no arrows point to a box (object), it is eligible for garbage collection.