1. B C
2. A D
3. A C D
4. A, B, G. Options A and B are correct because the single vararg parameter is the last parameter declared. Option G is correct because it doesn’t use any vararg parameters at all. Options C and F are incorrect because the vararg parameter is not last. Option D is incorrect because two vararg parameters are not allowed in the same method. Option E is incorrect because the ... for a vararg must be after the type, not before it.
5. D, G. Option D passes the initial parameter plus two more to turn into a vararg array of size 2. Option G passes the initial parameter plus an array of size 2. Option A does not compile because it does not pass the initial parameter. Options E and F do not compile because they do not declare an array properly. It should be new boolean[] {true}. Option B creates a vararg array of size 0 and option C creates a vararg array of size 1.
6. D. Option D is correct. This is the common implementation for encapsulation by setting all fields to be private and all methods to be public. Option A is incorrect because protected access allows everything that package private access allows and additionally allows subclasses access. Option B is incorrect because the class is public. This means that other classes can see the class. However, they cannot call any of the methods or read any of the fields. It is essentially a useless class. Option C is incorrect because package private access applies to the whole package. Option E is incorrect because Java has no such capability.