11. A F
12. C. The functional interface takes two int parameters. The code on line x1 attempts to use them as if one is an Object, resulting in a compiler error making C the correct answer. It also tries to return String even though the data type for the functional interface method is boolean. It is tricky to use types in a lambda when they are implicitly specified. Remember to check the interface for the real type.
13. B C E
14. A B D E 
15. B, C. A reference to an object requires an explicit cast if referenced with a subclass, so A is incorrect. If the cast is to a superclass reference, then an explicit cast is not required, so C is correct. If a method takes the superclass of an object as a parameter, then any subclass references may be used without a cast, so B is correct. Some cast exceptions can be detected as errors at compile-time, but others can only be detected at runtime, so D is incorrect. Due to the nature of polymorphism, a public instance method can be overridden in a subclass and calls to it will be replaced even in the superclass in which it was defined, so E is incorrect.
16. F. The interface variable amount is correctly declared, with public, static, and final being assumed and automatically inserted by the compiler, so B is incorrect. The method declaration for eatGrass() on line 3 is incorrect because the method has been marked as static but no method body has been provided. The method declaration for chew() on line 4 is also incorrect, since an interface method that provides a body must be marked as default or static explicitly. Therefore, F is the correct answer since this code contains two compile-time errors.
17. B, C, F. Options B, C, and F are each correct statements about JavaBean encapsulation. A is incorrect, as that is a property of the immutable object pattern, not encapsulation. D is incorrect, as there is no such JavaBean interface defined in the Java API. Finally, E is incorrect, as handling instantiation is not part of encapsulation.
18. A, B, E. A is correct, and it is one of the reasons to prefer class inheritance over object composition. B is also correct, since object composition tends to lead to classes that are easier to reference, as they don’t require knowledge of any parent classes. C is incorrect, as inheritance tends to use the is-a principle, whereas object composition relies on the has-a principle. D is incorrect, as this is a statement about inheritance, not object composition. E is correct, as object composition has no notion of inheritance and variables must be exposed publically if they are to be used by other classes in different packages. F is incorrect, as neither are always the right answer. There are situations where inheritance is more appropriate, and situations where object composition is more appropriate.
19. B, D, E. A is incorrect, as that is a property of the immutable object pattern. B is correct, as caching data is one of the most common uses of the singleton pattern. While the singleton pattern may use lazy instantiation, it is not used to ensure that objects are lazily instantiated, so C is incorrect. D is correct, as we only want one class writing to a log file at once. E is also correct, as managing application-wide configuration data is another very common use of the singleton pattern. F is incorrect, as we only want one instance of a static object created when using the singleton pattern.
20. A