9. A. Although the definition of methods on lines 2 and 5 vary, both will be converted to public abstract by the compiler. Line 4 is fine, because an interface can have public or default access. Finally, the class Falcon doesn’t need to implement the interface methods because it is marked as abstract. Therefore, the code will compile without issue.
10. B, C, E, F. Option A is wrong, because an abstract class may contain concrete methods. Since Java 8, interfaces may also contain concrete methods in form of static or default methods. Although all variables in interfaces are assumed to be public static final, abstract classes may contain them as well, so option B is correct. Both abstract classes and interfaces can be extended with the extends keyword, so option C is correct. Only interfaces can contain default methods, so option D is incorrect. Both abstract classes and interfaces can contain static methods, so option E is correct. Both structures require a concrete subclass to be instantiated, so option F is correct. Finally, though an instance of an object that implements an interface inherits java.lang. Object, the interface itself doesn’t; otherwise, Java would support multiple inheritance for objects, which it doesn’t. Therefore, option G is incorrect. 
11. A D E
12. B
13. A
14. C
15. B. Concrete classes are, by definition, not abstract, so option A is incorrect. A concrete class must implement all inherited abstract methods, so option B is correct. Option C is incorrect; a superclass may have already implemented an inherited interface, so the concrete subclass would not need to implement the method. Concrete classes can be both final and not final, so option D is incorrect. Finally, abstract methods must be overridden by a concrete subclass, so option E is incorrect.