### equals

Remember that Java uses == to compare primitives and for checking if two variables refer to the same object. Checking if two objects are equivalent uses the equals() method, or at least it does if the developer implementing the method overrides equals().

String does have an equals() method. It checks that the values are the same. StringBuilder uses the implementation of equals() provided by Object, which simply checks if the two objects being referred to are the same.

__The Contract for equals() Methods__: Since equals() is such a key method, Java provides a number of rules in the contract for the method. The exam expects you to recognize correct and incorrect equals() methods, but it will not ask you to name which property is broken. That said, it is helpful to have seen it at least once.

The equals() method implements an equivalence relation on non‐null object references:
   - It is reflexive: For any non‐null reference value x, x.equals(x) should return true.
   - It is symmetric: For any non‐null reference values x and y, x.equals(y) should return true if and only if y.equals(x) returns true.
   - It is transitive: For any non‐null reference values x, y, and z, if x.equals(y) returns true and y.equals(z) returns true, then x.equals(z) should return true.
   - It is consistent: For any non‐null reference values x and y, multiple invocations of x.equals(y) consistently return true or consistently return false, provided no information used in equals comparisons on the objects is modified.
   - For any non‐null reference value x, x.equals(null) should return false.

Much of this is common sense. The definition of equality doesn’t change at random, and the same objects can’t be equal “sometimes.” The most interesting rule is the last one. It should be obvious that an object and null aren’t equal. The key is that equals() needs to return false when this occurs rather than throw a NullPointerException.

__The Easy Way to Write equals() Methods__: Like toString(), you can use Apache Commons Lang to do a lot of the work for you. If you want all of the instance variables to be checked, your equals() method can be one line:

```java
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
 return EqualsBuilder.reflectionEquals(this, obj);
}
```

This is nice. However, for equals(), it is common to look at just one or two instance variables rather than all of them.

```java
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
 if ( !(obj instanceof LionEqualsBuilder)) return false;
 Lion other = (Lion) obj;
 return new EqualsBuilder().appendSuper(super.equals(obj))
  .append(idNumber, other.idNumber)
  .append(name, other.name)
  .isEquals();
}
```

Not quite as elegant, right? You have to remember to handle the null and instanceof guard conditions first. It is still better than having to code the whole thing by hand, though. Comparing the idNumber is easy because you can call ==. Comparing the name means checking that either both names are null or the names are the same. If either name is null, you need to return false. This logic is a bit messy if you write it out by hand.