- __Creating and Manipulating Strings__: A string is basically a sequence of characters. In Java, these two snippets both create a String:
```java
String name = "Fluffy";
String name = new String("Fluffy");
```

- Both give you a reference variable of type name pointing to the String object "Fluffy". They are subtly different, as you’ll see in the section “String Pool,” later in this chapter. For now, just remember that the String class is special and doesn’t need to be instantiated with new.

- __Concatenation__: Placing one String before the other String and combining them together is called string concatenation. The OCA exam creators like string concatenation because the + operator can be used in two ways within the same line of code. There aren’t a lot of rules to know for this, but you have to know them well:
   - If both operands are numeric, + means numeric addition.
   - If either operand is a String, + means concatenation.
   - The expression is evaluated left to right.
```java
System.out.println(1 + 2); // 3
System.out.println("a" + "b"); // ab
System.out.println("a" + "b" + 3); // ab3
System.out.println(1 + 2 + "c"); // 3c
```

- When you see this, just take it slow and remember the three rules—and be sure to check the variable types. In this example, we start with the third rule, which tells us to consider 1 + 2. The first rule gives us 3. Next we have 3 + three. Since three is of type int, we still use the first rule, giving us 6. Next we have 6 + four. Since four is of type String, we switch to the second rule and get a final answer of "64". When you see questions like this, just take your time and check the types. Being methodical pays off.
```
int three = 3;
String four = "4";
System.out.println(1 + 2 + three + four);
```

- To review the rules one more time: use numeric addition if two numbers are involved, use concatenation otherwise, and evaluate from left to right. Have you memorized these three rules yet? Be sure to do so before the exam!

- __Immutability__: Once a String object is created, it is not allowed to change. It cannot be made larger or smaller, and you cannot change one of the characters inside it. 

- You can think of a string as a storage box you have perfectly full and whose sides can’t bulge. There’s no way to add objects, nor can you replace objects without disturbing the entire arrangement. The trade-off for the optimal packing is zero flexibility.

- Mutable is another word for changeable. Immutable is the opposite—an object that can’t be changed once it’s created. On the OCA exam, you need to know that String is immutable.

- __More on Immutability__: You won’t be asked to identify whether custom classes are immutable on the exam, but it’s helpful to see an example. Consider the following code:
```java
class Mutable {
  private String s;
  public void setS(String newS){ s = newS; } // Setter makes it mutable
  public String getS() { return s; }
}
final class Immutable {
  private String s = "name";
  public String getS() { return s; }
}
```

- Immutable only has a getter. There's no way to change the value of s once it's set. Mutable has a setter as well. This allows the reference s to change to point to a different String later. Note that even though the String class is immutable, it can still be used in a mutable class. You can even make the instance variable final so the compiler reminds you if you accidentally change s.

- Also, immutable classes in Java are final, and subclasses can’t add mutable behavior. You learned that + is used to do String concatenation in Java. There’s another way, which isn’t used much on real projects but is great for tricking people on the exam. What does this print out?
```java
String s1 = "1";
String s2 = s1.concat("2");
s2.concat("3");
System.out.println(s2);
```

- Did you say "12"? Good. The trick is to see if you forget that the String class is immutable by throwing a method at you.

- __The String Pool__: Since strings are everywhere in Java, they use up a lot of memory. In some production applications, they can use up 25–40 percent of the memory in the entire program. Java realizes that many strings repeat in the program and solves this issue by reusing common ones. The string pool, also known as the intern pool, is a location in the Java virtual machine (JVM) that collects all these strings. 

- The string pool contains literal values that appear in your program. For example, “name” is a literal and therefore goes into the string pool. myObject.toString() is a string but not a literal, so it does not go into the string pool. Strings not in the string pool are garbage collected just like any other object. Remember back when we said these two lines are subtly different?
```java
String name = "Fluffy";
String name = new String("Fluffy");
```

- The former says to use the string pool normally. The second says “No, JVM. I really don’t want you to use the string pool. Please create a new object for me even though it is less efficient.” When you write programs, you wouldn’t want to do this. For the exam, you need to know that it is allowed.