1. C E
2. E
3. A, D. A is correct as Climb defines an interface with exactly one abstract method. B is incorrect, as abstract classes are not functional interfaces despite having a single abstract method. While functional interfaces may have any number of default methods, ArcticMountainClimb will not compile due to the default method getSpeed() missing an implementation body, so C is incorrect. D is correct, as the interface MountainClimb has exactly one abstract method defined in Climb. Finally, E is incorrect because A and D are correct.
4. A, D. The first lambda expression is valid, taking no arguments and returning the empty string, so A is correct. B is incorrect, as more than one parameter requires parentheses (). C is incorrect, as brackets {} are required when using return. D is correct, as the expression takes one Camel input and returns void. E is incorrect, as parentheses are required when using the data type Wolf. F is incorrect, as it has no right-side expression. Finally, G is incorrect, as specifying the data type for one parameter in a lambda expression requires you to specify the data type for all parameters in the expression. In this case, z has a data type and m does not, therefore the expression is invalid.
5. B, E, F. A is incorrect, as any method that changes the singleton breaks the singleton pattern. B is correct, as the constructor of the singleton class must be private, else other classes would be able to instantiate it, breaking the singleton pattern. C is incorrect, as the name of the object itself, as well as the method to retrieve the singleton, is not defined in the pattern. D is incorrect, as the object must be marked private. If it was marked protected, it would not be properly encapsulated and other classes would have access to it. E is correct, as the purpose of a singleton is to ensure that all threads share the same instance of the object in memory. F is correct, as a public static method is required for all threads to
access the same singleton.
6. A
7. C E G H
8. C, F. A and B are both incorrect as interfaces can extend other interfaces, although not classes. C is correct since a class may implement multiple interfaces. D is incorrect as interfaces have static and default methods, as well as static final variables. E is incorrect as interfaces are assumed to be abstract, and abstract and final can never be used together. F is correct as interface methods and variables are each assumed public.
9. D F
10. D