# PICKING YOUR PARTS

The graphics card is another monumentally important part of your PC build. You won’t need a graphics card for basic office utilities, but for things like gaming, 3D rendering, and high-resolution video editing it’s essential to have a graphics card. The graphics card market, much like the CPU market, is dominated by 2 brands. AMD has its Radeon line of graphics cards, while Nvidia has its Geforce line.

Geforce cards can range in performance from can’t-run-Valorant-at- 30FPS office-grade GPU’s to the RTX 3090, which is a beast of a graphics card to say the least (It’s the indisputable best consumer-grade card available). Meanwhile, Radeon cards mostly fall into the lower-to-mid tier, but offer a better performance-to-cost ratio.

Choosing your GPU is fairly straightforward. Similar to the CPUselection process, the best way to decide on your ideal graphics card is to look up benchmarks and figure out what card will meet your needs. Make sure to take your time and whittle your options down before making an ultimate decision. As I recommended when picking a processor, [this](https://www.gpucheck.com/gpu-benchmark-comparison) is a great tool for comparing framerates with essentially any GPU-CPU combination. Tom’s Hardware has also graced us with an excellent GPU hierarchy list, which you can view [here](https://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/gpu-hierarchy,4388.html), which should help you find where your prospective graphics card sits in relation to others.

Between these resources, it should be fairly simple to find your ideal graphics card. Find the general range in the hierarchy list that you think will give you the performance you need while not exceeding your budget, pick a specific card, and run a benchmark. If it performs better than is necessary (ie. It gets 300 frames per second in the game you will be playing when you’re only planning on buying an 144hz monitor), you might want to try a less-expensive card in order to get more value while still getting the performance you’re looking for. Picking a graphics card is a trial-and-error process, so it will probably take a decent amount of research before you finally find the exact one you’re looking for. Keep in mind that your CPU heavily influences your computer’s in-game performance as well, so it may be beneficial to try a different CPU in the mix as well.

# A Note on Bottlenecking:

If you buy a CPU that is significantly more powerful than your GPU, or vice versa, this can result in a CPU or GPU bottleneck. What this means is that one piece of hardware is maxing out while the other is not using close to its full potential.

For example, a CPU bottleneck would occur if your processor was running at 100% of its capacity while your graphics card is only at 40%. At the most basic level, this means you inefficiently spent money. Your frames are capped by your CPU’s performance, so even though your graphics card can handle the workload demanded of it easily, its extra power does you no good. You’d be better off buying a more powerful CPU and spending a little less on your graphics card, since this way you will get more frames per second at the same cost. Ideally both your processor and GPU will be at similar percentages when running games at full blast, as this indicates that your system is efficient.

It’s also worth noting that some games are more CPU-reliant, sometimes referred to as being “CPU bound” or “CPU locked”. The benchmark tool I showed earlier should account for this, but keep in mind that if you plan on playing multiple games, you should be aware of which ones are CPU bound so you can get a more powerful processor if you think that you will be playing these.