- About Kotlin: Kotlin is a modern programming language that helps developers be more productive. For example, Kotlin allows you to be more concise and write fewer lines of code for the same functionality compared to other programming languages. Apps that are built with Kotlin are also less likely to crash, resulting in a more stable and robust app for users. Essentially, with Kotlin, you can write better Android apps in a shorter amount of time. As a result, Kotlin is gaining momentum in the industry and is the language that the majority of professional Android developers use.

- Warning: Unlike in some languages, such as Java, where a function can change the value passed into a parameter, parameters in Kotlin are immutable. You cannot reassign the value of a parameter from within the function body.

- Android Studio is the official integrated development environment (IDE) for Android app development, built and distributed by Google. An IDE contains tools that enable software developers to design, build, run, and test software, in this case, apps for the Android platform. Android Studio uses IntelliJ IDEA as its foundation and includes the Android plugin pre-installed along with some modifications specifically for the Android platform.

- Find project files
   - In Android Studio, take a look at the Project tab. The Project tab shows the files and folders of your project. When you were setting up your project the package name was com.example.greetingcard. You can see that package right here in the Project tab. A package is basically a folder where code is located. Android Studio organizes the project in a directory structure made up of a set of packages.
   - If necessary, select Android from the drop-down menu in the Project tab.
   - Select Project Source Files from the drop-down menu. You can now browse the files in the same way as in any file browser.
   - Select Android again to switch back to the previous view. You use the Android view for this course. If your file structure ever looks strange, check to make sure you're still in Android view.

- The onCreate() function is the entry point to this Android app and calls other functions to build the user interface. In Kotlin programs, the main() function is the entry point/starting point of execution. In Android apps, the onCreate() function fills that role.