# Motherboard Introduction

The Motherboard is the heart of the computer, so to speak. Everything connects to the motherboard in some way, shape, or form. When you plug in a mouse or an ethernet cable, you plug it into the motherboard. Graphics cards, RAM, the CPU, and storage drives all connect to the Motherboard. The most important factors to consider when choosing a motherboard are compatibility with other parts, most notably with your CPU.

You don’t need to spend big on the motherboard. The main factors to consider when choosing one are the number of RAM slots and compatibility with the rest of your components. In specific, CPU compatibility varies greatly between motherboards, since different generations and brands of processors feature different socket types. There’s no need to worry about these specifics, though, because if you pick a CPU for your system build on PC Part Picker, it will then only show you motherboards that are compatible, thus simplifying the process a little.

Unless you’re building a rig with dual graphics cards (which I wouldn’t recommend) you won’t need more than one PCIe slot. There are three main types of motherboard: ATX, Micro-ATX, and Mini-ITX. While there are many other sizes, they are not nearly as common as these three.
   - __ATX:__ This is the full-sized motherboard, and comes with multiple PCIe slots and four RAM slots. It costs more and takes up more space than the other two sizes, but in exchange allows for greater customizability; you can have more RAM and run dual graphics cards if desired.
   - __Micro-ATX:__ This is the mid-sized motherboard. It is generally cheaper than its smaller counterpart, and usually comes complete with four RAM slots and one PCIe slot. This should be enough for just about any PC build, since theoretically you could have 128GB of RAM and just about any graphics card.
   - __Mini-ITX:__ This is the smallest motherboard, but it’s typically more expensive than a Micro-ATX. It is usually only used when you need to fit your PC in a very tight compartment.

The best course of action is usually to decide what CPU, RAM, graphics card, and case to use first, then choose your Motherboard based on this.