# Central Processing Unit (CPU) Introduction

The CPU, also frequently called the processor, is one of the most important components of a computer. Without it your computer is useless. Almost all processes on a computer are performed by the CPU; it even generates the image on your screen if you don’t have a graphics card (assuming your CPU has integrated graphics). It is monumentally important to pick a CPU that will be able to handle the workload you demand of it.

The CPU is probably the most important component, so it’s important to consider thoroughly when picking one. There are two main brands to choose from: Intel and AMD. There are many generations of CPU’s (Intel is on its 10th generation, and AMD’s Ryzen processors are on their 5th). Within each brand, there are four main categories to choose from:
   - __The 9 category:__ Intel’s Core i9 and AMD’s Ryzen 9 processor. These are the most powerful processors available, and consequently the most expensive. You will only ever need an i9 or Ryzen 9 for pushing extremely high framerates or resolutions on the most demanding of games, or for extreme multitasking such as streaming and running games simultaneously.
   - __The 7 category:__ Intel’s Core i7 and AMD’s Ryzen 7 processor. These are extremely powerful processors and are capable of running games at very high framerates when paired with a good graphics card, and capable of running many programs at the same time with no trouble. The i7 or Ryzen 7 is typically the best processor choice for a gaming rig, as these can get 240 frames per second in all but the most CPU intensive games. Their in-game performance is almost identical to that of their i9 counterparts in most cases, so it’s definitely worth saving the money if you can. They may also be the best option for you if you plan on having a very large number of programs running simultaneously.
   - __The 5 category:__ Intel’s Core i5 and AMD’s Ryzen 5 processor. These are still very strong processors and can pull at least 144 frames per second in most games when paired with a good graphics card. An i5 or Ryzen 5 is good if you’re looking to build a gaming rig on a budget, or if you need to run office-type software (like word processors, Internet browsers, or spreadsheets) at maximum speed.
   - The 3 category: Intel’s Core i3 and AMD’s Ryzen 3 processor. These are the cheapest processors, but also the least powerful. These are typically the best choice only if you’re looking to build a PC for basic office-type functions as described above, such as email and Internet browsing. That’s not to say they can’t be used for gaming, though. Some higher-end i3 and Ryzen 3 processors can easily run AAA games at well upwards of 60FPS, so do your research before buying.

As such, it’s worth noting that there is a great deal of overlap between these categories in terms of performance. This means that the best i3 is far better than the worst i5, the best i5 is a lot better than the worst i7, and the same goes for the i7 and i9. The Ryzen 5 5600x, for example, outperforms Intel’s i9-9900k in gaming benchmarks. As a general rule, however, when comparing same-generation processors, the i9 is the best, followed by the i7, i5, and i3 in that order. The same applies to Ryzen processors.

## Which is better: AMD or Intel?

It’s impossible to say whether one of these two brands are superior. AMD and Intel both manufacture excellent processors, and in the current state of the market neither brand is the definitive best. In terms of gaming performance, Ryzen currently holds the top 4 spots according to the [Tom’s Hardware CPU Benchmark Hierarchy](https://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/cpu-hierarchy,4312.html) (which I’d definitely check out before settling on a processor), but Intel’s high-end processors are still a force to be reckoned with.

## Conclusion

When choosing a CPU then, it’s best to choose based on these general guidelines. Once you have narrowed your choice down to a category, you need to decide which specific processor you want (for example, there are 12 9th-generation i7 processors). When building a gaming rig, decide what kind of performance you want from your PC and what resolution you intend to run it at, and run benchmarks. First, I’d start by looking at this list to get a good idea of how each CPU compares to its peers. Once you have a general idea of what price/quality range you’re interested in buying from, I would test different CPU/Graphics card combinations here to get a reasonable estimate for what framerate you will be able to get, in what games, and on what settings. If you want to compare two different CPUs with the same graphics card, use this tool. If, say, you’re looking to run Modern Warfare on low settings at 144FPS in 1080p, try different combinations of CPU and GPU to see how cheap you can get your build while still getting the quality you want. Consider the benchmark an overestimate and leave some margin for error, so if you want 144 frames, look for a CPU-GPU combination that gets around 180 in order to play it safe. Games can become less optimized over time (see Fortnite Battle Royale for a great example of this), so it’s best to leave some wiggle room. If you’re building an office-grade PC and don’t intend to buy a graphics card, double-check that the processor you want has integrated graphics before you order it. Without integrated graphics, your processor can’t create an image on the screen, rendering it worthless (I’m sorry).